KEP-11823: EffectiveResourceGroups (#11865)
kubernetes-sigs/kueue: keps/11823-effective-resource-groups/README.md

Reviewer: Can you add user stories for your current situation?

Author: On it

Reviewer: Can you add .status.resourceGroups API proposal to the design section?

Author: On it

  - [Test Plan](#test-plan)
    - [Prerequisite testing updates](#prerequisite-testing-updates)
    - [Unit tests](#unit-tests)
    - [Integration tests](#integration-tests)
    - [e2e tests](#e2e-tests)
  - [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
- [Drawbacks](#drawbacks)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)
  - [Treat MultiKueue automation as priority](#treat-multikueue-automation-as-priority)
  - [Let spec override effective quota](#let-spec-override-effective-quota)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

This KEP extends the current resource group definition mechanism of Kueue to accommodate automated quota management.

The proposal is to introduce a new ClusterQueue Status field: `EffectiveResourceGroups`, used to represent and track the ClusterQueue quota as interpreted by the Kueue scheduler.

## Motivation

We need a way to track the ClusterQueue quota. In the default case the quota is static and described by the user in `spec.ResourceGroups`. There are however two ongoing initiatives aiming to automate ClusterQueue quota management:
1. [KEP 8826](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/pull/8864)

> 1. [KEP 9988](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/tree/main/keps/9988-multikueue-manager-quota-automation#move-the-aggregated-quota-out-of-clusterqueuespec)

Reviewer 2: Make the visible text for these links to say the name of the keps. Otherwise I have to click something else to get full context. ty!

    * MultiKueue setup without Quota automation: MultiKueue enabled, MultiKueueManagerQuotaAutomation feature disabled.
    * MultiKueue with MultiKueueManagerQuotaAutomation enabled.

## Proposal

We introduce the new `status.EffectiveResourceGroups` field alongside the `spec.ResourceGroups` field.
The `status.EffectiveResourceGroups` will add a layer between the `spec.ResourceGroups` (set directly by users) and Kueue logic. The field will always be populated. By default it will reflect the value set in spec.

```go
type ClusterQueueStatus struct {

	// [...]

	// effectiveResourceGroups describes the groups of resources as seen by Kueue controllers.
	// Each resource group defines the list of resources and a list of flavors
	// that provide quotas for these resources.
	// Each resource and each flavor can only form part of one resource group.
	// By default, it's equal to spec.resourceGroups. However, in some scenarios (e.g. MultiKueue)
	// it may differ from spec.resourceGroups.
	// +listType=atomic
	// +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=16
	// +optional
	EffectiveResourceGroups []ResourceGroup `json:"effectiveResourceGroups,omitempty"`

	// [...]

}
```

> All internal Kueue logic will use either the `spec.ResourceGroups` or the `status.EffectiveResourceGroups` as a source of truth for the ClusterQueue's quota, based on whether the `EffectiveResourceQuotas` featureGate is enabled.

Reviewer 3: Huh, there's one tricky case for this rule, namely... MultiKueue quota automation :)

Currently, we fetch remote `ClusterQueue` objects and check their `.Spec.NominalQuota`.

Now, we'll sometimes need to switch to effective quotas on the workers.
(Not even due to MK automation, as MK can't be chained - but possibly due to node capacity reader ([KEP-10270](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/pull/10745)) or hero jobs ([KEP-8826](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/pull/8864)) operating on the workers).

And now fun part: we'll need to use worker's effective quotas if effective quotas are enabled... where?
I guess on that worker?

I roughly see 2 options:

1. Let the manager check the FG state on each worker, and act accordingly.
   * I'm not sure how feasible, or how easy, this is.
     Keep in mind FGs can be switched not just in the `Configuration` object but also via command-line args.
     (Also, even `Configuration` lives outside `etcd`, right?)
     * Would we need to make a list of FGs an annotation on the `kueue-controller-manager` Pod?
       (Updated by that Pod itself, on its startup).
       So that the manager can read it from workers' `etcd` objects?
       Would such a trick be viable if that Pod is managed e.g. by a Deployment?

2. Let the manager check if `effectiveResourceGroups` field exists on the remote CQ, and fall back to spec if it doesn't.
   * That's easier to implement - but a bit hacky, and potentially unsafe.
     For example, every newly created remote CQ will have no `effectiveResourceGroups` for a short initial period, even if the FG is enabled.
     Then, if [KEP-10270](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/pull/10745) goes for its "Option C" (see [here](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/pull/10745#discussion_r3403835468)), it could lead to a burst of over-booking on the manager side!

Setting the value of the effective quota will be handled by the Core-ClusterQueue-Controller and MultiKueue-ClusterQueue-Controller depending on the configuration:

1. By default, `EffectiveResourceGroups` will always mirror `spec.ResourceGroups`. `EffectiveResourceGroups` will be synced to `spec.ResourceGroups` during reconciliation in the Core ClusterQueue Controller.
This covers both the cases when the MultiKueue ClusterQueue Controller is not created, and when it is but the ClusterQueue is not a MultiKueue CQ (does not have the MK AdmissionCheck).
2. When the MultiKueue ClusterQueue Controller is active, it will handle all ClusterQueues with the Multikueue Admission Check enabled. 
When the automation is **enabled** and **configured correctly** for a given MK CQ, `EffectiveResourceGroups` will be set directly to a value representing the aggregated quota across the Manager Queue's Workers, calculated as decided upon in [issue 11862](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/issues/11862). Otherwise it will be synced to `spec.ResourceGroups` as well.

> The MultiKueue ClusterQueue Controller will be created only when the following feature gates are enabled:

Reviewer 2: As a high level comment... I think we should go back to the drawing board and build out a full CRD API surface that interacts with this status with an easy override flow.

Looking at: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/issues/12382#issue-4701134859

You have 4 scenarios that need to interact with some "internal" idea of nominalquota that differs from what is set in the user facing nominalQuota: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/issues/12382#issuecomment-4781764553

For MultiKueue and DRA, we should consider overrides. For UberQueue and Temporary Quota Overrides, I assume admins shouldn't be able to interact with this outside of the dedicated new CRD. 

I also want to understand if we turn all of these on, how they interact with each other. So you'll need provenance and interaction descriptions. 

Overall, what kueue does with quota is generally confusing to users. So I'd also like the design to surface dedicate events or conditions where its easy to see from the CQ object that the quota is now being managed by something else.

Reviewer 2: Also. We need a (short) dedicated metrics section. That needs to come out of the box. Because most people I interact with have dashboards built out already that are extremely dependent on today's nominalquota.

Author: Hi Amy, will do.

For context: this KEP was created before #12382 (and was part of what sparked the considerations leading to the creation of that issue).
It will be adjusted based on the design we decide upon in #12382. Will make sure to take all feedback from here into account when that happens.

Reviewer 2: solid! Please tag me when its ready.

* It brings a risk of an infinite reconciling loop.

To resolve this issue and allow the aforementioned initiatives to be implemented in a robust and clean way, we propose introducing a new ClusterQueue Status field: `EffectiveResourceGroups` to store the automated quota value.

### Goals

1. Implement the `EffectiveResourceGroups` status field in ClusterQueue API.
2. Define a clear contract on how `EffectiveResourceGroups` is managed and utilized by Kueue in cases of:
    * Default setup: MultiKueue disabled; this case will be the basis for any possible future additions of more automated ClusterQueue quota management schemes,
    * MultiKueue setup without Quota automation: MultiKueue enabled, MultiKueueManagerQuotaAutomation feature disabled.
    * MultiKueue with MultiKueueManagerQuotaAutomation enabled.

## Proposal

We introduce the new `status.EffectiveResourceGroups` field alongside the `spec.ResourceGroups` field.
The `status.EffectiveResourceGroups` will add a layer between the `spec.ResourceGroups` (set directly by users) and Kueue logic. The field will always be populated. By default it will reflect the value set in spec.

> All internal Kueue logic will use either the `spec.ResourceGroups` or the `status.EffectiveResourceGroups` as a source of truth for the ClusterQueue's quota, based on whether the feature is enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All internal Kueue logic will use either the `spec.ResourceGroups` or the `status.EffectiveResourceGroups` as a source of truth for the ClusterQueue's quota, based on whether the `EffectiveResourceQuotas` featureGate is enabled.
```

Does this mean that status will be considered only when EffectiveResourceQuotas feature gate is enabled? Or does this mean you are planning to add another knob to enable this feature?

Author: Yes, the EffectiveResourceQuotas fg is there to lock all access (set and get alike) to the status.EffectiveResourceGroups field.

1. By default, `EffectiveResourceGroups` will always mirror `spec.ResourceGroups`. `EffectiveResourceGroups` will be synced to `spec.ResourceGroups` during reconciliation in the Core ClusterQueue Controller.
This covers both the cases when the MultiKueue ClusterQueue Controller is not created, and when it is but the ClusterQueue is not a MultiKueue CQ (does not have the MK AdmissionCheck).
2. When the MultiKueue ClusterQueue Controller is active, it will handle all ClusterQueues with the Multikueue Admission Check enabled. 
When the automation is **enabled** and **configured correctly** for a given MK CQ, `EffectiveResourceGroups` will be set directly to a value representing the aggregated quota across the Manager Queue's Workers, calculated as decided upon in [issue 11862](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/issues/11862). Otherwise it will be synced to `spec.ResourceGroups` as well.

The MultiKueue ClusterQueue Controller will be created only when the following feature gates are enabled:
1. MultiKueue
1. MultiKueueManagerQuotaAutomation

> 1. **EffectiveResourceQuotas**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. MultiKueue
2. MultiKueueManagerQuotaAutomation
3. **EffectiveResourceQuotas**
```

I know that GH markdown viewer automatically increment item numbers, but I think that it would be better to avoid depending on the non-std markdown specifications.

> 1. **EffectiveResourceQuotas**

Reviewer: What if all FGs are enabled, but MultiKueue is not enabled? Which resource groups (spec vs status) are effective? 

I'm wondering if we should decouple this EffectiveResourceGroups feature from MultiKueue usages, because if the external controller can reflect their requirement (e.g., add or subtract some system overhead), it would be useful. I know such stories in some companies.

But, I'm ok with excluding non-mk usage for this EffectiveResourceGroups in the alpha stage. If you agree with revisiting this non-mk usage in beta stage, please add it to future works section.

Author: `What if all FGs are enabled, but MultiKueue is not enabled?`
Then the status field will be used via the `Default` behavior.

In short

The FG tells us whether the effective rgs are in the spec or in status (and makes kueue populate them accordingly).

If the FG is enabled, we will also allow the users of MK to enable automation. The EffectiveResourceQuota FG is independent. I is only the MK Automation feature that will become dependent on the ERQ FG.

We consider MultiKueue Automated Quota Management **enabled** and **configured correctly** when:
1. The Quota Management Strategy value is **"Automated"**.

> 1. **spec.ResourceGroups is empty.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The Quota Management Strategy value is **"Automated"**.
2. **spec.ResourceGroups is empty.**
```

ditto

> 1. **spec.ResourceGroups is empty.**

Reviewer: Does this mean that we will add webhook or marker based valiadations so that users or controllers can not specify `.spec.resourceGroups` under this situation?

Author: The idea was to use the existing validation scheme, a.k.a. we will refuse to auto aggregate in MK and set the Condition of the CQ to automation false because UnsupportedConfiguration.

Mitigating this requires an expansive sweep of existing logic, ensuring the code is made secure against:
* referencing an empty `spec.ResourceGroups` or `status.EffectiveResourceGroups` properties,
* a misalignment/delay of `status.EffectiveResourceGroups` being synced to `spec.ResourceGroups`.

## Design Details

`status.EffectiveResourceGroups` will be managed by either the Core ClusterQueue Controller or the MultiKueue ClusterQueue Controller (mutually exclusive) as described in the [Proposal](#proposal) section.

The `status.EffectiveResourceGroups` will be used to provide resource quota only when the **EffectiveResourceQuotas** feature is enabled. Otherwise we will default to using the spec. To make this feasible, all effective calls to retrieve the ResourceGroups will be handled by a dedicated method:

```go
func GetEffectiveResourceGroups(cq *kueue.ClusterQueue) []kueue.ResourceGroup {
	if features.Enabled(features.EffectiveResourceQuotas) {
		return cq.Status.EffectiveResourceGroups
	}
	return cq.spec.ResourceGroups
}

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Let's focus only on specifications in KEPs to make the KEP long-living reference doc.

MultiKueue quota automation will, since its [Alpha2](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/tree/main/keps/9988-multikueue-manager-quota-automation#graduation-criteria) stage, require the **EffectiveResourceQuotas** feature to be enabled alongside its dedicated feature gate.

### Default behavior

By default `status.EffectiveResourceGroups` will be synced to the current value `spec.ResourceGroups`.

```go
// pkg/util/queue/cluster_queue.go

func SyncEffectiveResourceGroupsToSpec(cq *kueue.ClusterQueue) (needsUpdate bool) {
	if needsUpdate = !equality.Semantic.DeepEqual(cq.Status.EffectiveResourceGroups, cq.Spec.ResourceGroups); needsUpdate {
		cq.Status.EffectiveResourceGroups = cq.Spec.ResourceGroups
	}
	return
}

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

ditto: implementations in KEP.

### Core Controller

The Core Controller is the default controller handling the new parameter.
The reconciliation logic will check if the ClusterQueue is subject to the default handling scheme and perform the [Default Behavior](#default-behavior) if applicable.

As of right now the only reason for special handling is the MultiKueue Manager ClusterQueue quota automation scheme, but more can be added in the future.
When the controller detects a reason for special handling of quota sync, it will log it and skip the default behavior.

```go
  // pkg/controller/core/clusterqueue_controller.go

  if isMK, err := admissioncheck.QuotaManagedByMultiKueue(ctx, r.client, &cqObj); err != nil {
		return ctrl.Result{}, err
	} else if isMK {
		log.V(2).Info("Skipping EffectiveResourceGroups sync: MultiKueue Manager ClusterQueue quota is managed by a dedicated MultiKueue controller.")
	} else if queue.SyncEffectiveResourceGroupsToSpec(&cqObj) {
		log.V(2).Info("Syncing EffectiveResourceGroups to spec.")
		if err := r.client.Status().Update(ctx, &cqObj); err != nil {
			return ctrl.Result{}, err
		}
	}

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

ditto: implementations in KEP.

# KEP-11823: *EffectiveResourceGroups*

<!--
This is the title of your KEP. Keep it short, simple, and descriptive. A good
title can help communicate what the KEP is and should be considered as part of
any review.
-->

<!--
A table of contents is helpful for quickly jumping to sections of a KEP and for
highlighting any additional information provided beyond the standard KEP
template.

Ensure the TOC is wrapped with
  <code>&lt;!-- toc --&rt;&lt;!-- /toc --&rt;</code>
tags, and then generate with `hack/update-toc.sh`.

> -->

Reviewer 3: And similarly below

```suggestion
```

  - [Let spec override effective quota](#let-spec-override-effective-quota)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

<!--
This section is incredibly important for producing high-quality, user-focused
documentation such as release notes or a development roadmap. It should be
possible to collect this information before implementation begins, in order to
avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

This KEP extends the current resource group definition mechanism of Kueue to accommodate automated quota management.

> The proposal is to introduce a new ClusterQueue Status field: *EffectiveResourceGroups*, used to represent and track the ClusterQueue quota as interpreted by the Kueue scheduler.

Reviewer 3: Why rendering *EffectiveResourceGroups* and *spec.ResourceGroups* in italics?

It's way more standard to write `EffectiveResourceGroups` and `Spec.ResourceGroups`, with backticks.

(BTW in the KEP title I'd leave it unformatted).

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

We need a way to track the ClusterQueue quota. In the default case the quota is static and described by the user in *spec.ResourceGroups*.

When automating effective quota calculation, using *spec.ResourceGroups* to store the value would mean allowing Kueue to modify spec of objects it's supposed to reconcile (specifically, ClusterQueues). This may be perceived as a design smell because:
* It blurs the line between configuration (managed by users) and state (managed by controllers).
* It brings a risk of an infinite reconciling loop.

There are two ongoing initiatives aiming to automate ClusterQueue quota management:
1. [KEP 8826](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/pull/8864)
1. [KEP 9988](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/tree/main/keps/9988-multikueue-manager-quota-automation#move-the-aggregated-quota-out-of-clusterqueuespec)

To resolve this issue and allow the aforementioned initiatives to be implemented in a robust and clean way, we propose introducing a new ClusterQueue Status field: *EffectiveResourceGroups* to store the automated quota value.

> 

Reviewer 3: I'm feeling this will make things read more "in order", without surprises on the way.
(Sadly, the displayed diff is too large)

```suggestion
We need a way to track the ClusterQueue quota. In the default case the quota is static and described by the user in *spec.ResourceGroups*. However, there are two ongoing initiatives aiming to automate ClusterQueue quota management ([KEP 8826](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/pull/8864)
and [KEP 9988](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/tree/main/keps/9988-multikueue-manager-quota-automation#move-the-aggregated-quota-out-of-clusterqueuespec)).

When automating effective quota calculation, using *spec.ResourceGroups* to store the value would mean allowing Kueue to modify spec of objects it's supposed to reconcile (specifically, ClusterQueues). This may be perceived as a design smell because:
* It blurs the line between configuration (managed by users) and state (managed by controllers).
* It brings a risk of an infinite reconciling loop.

To resolve this issue and allow the aforementioned initiatives to be implemented in a robust and clean way, we propose introducing a new ClusterQueue Status field: *EffectiveResourceGroups* to store the automated quota value.

```

    * MultiKueue setup without Quota automation: MultiKueue enabled, MultiKueueManagerQuotaAutomation feature disabled.
    * MultiKueue with MultiKueueManagerQuotaAutomation enabled.

<!-- ### Non-Goals -->

## Proposal

We introduce the new *status.EffectiveResourceGroups* field alongside the *spec.ResourceGroups* field.
The *status.EffectiveResourceGroups* will add a layer between the *spec.ResourceGroups* (set directly by users) and Kueue logic. The field will always be populated. By default it will reflect the value set in spec.

All internal Kueue logic will use either the *spec.ResourceGroups* or the *status.EffectiveResourceGroups* as a source of truth for the ClusterQueue's quota, based on whether the feature is enabled.

Setting the value of the effective quota will be handled by the Core-ClusterQueue-Controller and MultiKueue-ClusterQueue-Controller depending on the configuration:

1. By default, *EffectiveResourceGroups* will always mirror *spec.ResourceGroups*. *EffectiveResourceGroups* will be synced to *spec.ResourceGroups* during reconciliation in the Core ClusterQueue Controller.

> This coveres both the cases when the MultiKueue ClusterQueue Controller is not created, and when it is but the ClusterQueue is not a MultiKueue CQ (does not have the MK AdmissionCheck).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This covers both the cases when the MultiKueue ClusterQueue Controller is not created, and when it is but the ClusterQueue is not a MultiKueue CQ (does not have the MK AdmissionCheck).
```

2. When the MultiKueue ClusterQueue Controller is active, it will handle all ClusterQueues with the Multikueue Admission Check enabled. 
When the automation is **enabled** and **configured correctly** for a given MK CQ, *EffectiveResourceGroups* will be set directly to a value representing the aggregated quota across the Manager Queue's Workers, calculated as decided upon in [issue 11862](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/issues/11862). Otherwise it will be synced to *spec.ResourceGroups* as well.

The MultiKueue ClusterQueue Controller will be created only when the following features are enabled:
1. feature.MultiKueue
1. feature.MultiKueueManagerQuotaAutomation

> 1. feature.**EffectiveResourceQuotas**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The MultiKueue ClusterQueue Controller will be created only when the following feature gates are enabled:
1. MultiKueue
1. MultiKueueManagerQuotaAutomation
1. **EffectiveResourceQuotas**
```

We consider MultiKueue Automated Quota Management **enabled** and **configured correctly** when:

> 1. The Quota Management Strategy is present (non-nil) and set to **"Automated"**.

Reviewer 3: That way, we'll abstract from the problem of the default value, which belongs to the scope of KEP-9988.

Whatever treatment for defaulting we define there - the phrasing here will remain correct.

```suggestion
1. The Quota Management Strategy value is **"Automated"**.
```

> 1. **spec.ResourceGroup is empty.**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. **spec.ResourceGroups is empty.**
```

> 1. **spec.ResourceGroup is empty.**

Reviewer 3: You'll say this again in "Design details", so maybe no need to repeat here?
Maybe you could just link to there, possibly separating out a subsection, "Responsible controller" or so?

<!-- ### User Stories (Optional)

#### Story 1 (Optional)

#### Story 2 (Optional)

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional) -->

### Risks and Mitigations

The major risk here is allowing *spec.ResourceGroups* to be empty.
Mitigating this requires an expansive sweep of existing logic, ensuring the code is made secure against:
* referencing an empty *spec.ResourceGroups* or *status.EffectiveResourceGroups* properties,
* a misalignment/delay of *status.EffectiveResourceGroups* being synced to *spec.ResourceGroups*.

## Design Details

*status.EffectiveResourceGroups* will be managed by either the Core ClusterQueue Controller or the MultiKueue ClusterQueue Controller (mutually exclusive):
1. *status.EffectiveResourceGroups* will be managed by the MultiKueue Controller when (AND):
	* The MultiKueue ClusterQueue Controller is active:
    * features.MultiKueue is enabled
    * features.MultiKueueManagerQuotaAutomation is enabled
    * features.**EffectiveResourceQuotas** is enabled

>   * ClusterQueue has the MultiKueue admission check assigned

Reviewer 3: This mis-renders; I guess you need to fix indents for the `*`-items.

2. Otherwise, *status.EffectiveResourceGroups* will be managed by the Core Controller.

The *status.EffectiveResourceGroups* will be used to provide resource quota only when the **EffectiveResourceQuotas** feature is enabled. Otherwise we will default to using the spec. To make this feasible, all effective calls to retrieve the ResourceGroups will be handled by a dedicated method:

```go

> func GetEffectiveResourceGroup(cq *kueue.ClusterQueue) []kueue.ResourceGroup {

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
func GetEffectiveResourceGroups(cq *kueue.ClusterQueue) []kueue.ResourceGroup {
```

	if features.Enabled(features.EffectiveResourceQuotas) {
		return cq.Status.EffectiveResourceGroups
	}
	return cq.spec.ResourceGroups
}
```

MultiKueue quota automation will, since its [Alpha2](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/tree/main/keps/9988-multikueue-manager-quota-automation#graduation-criteria) stage, require the **EffectiveResourceQuotas** feature to be enabled alongside its dedicated feature gate.

### Default behavior

By default *status.EffectiveResourceGroups* will be synced to the current value *spec.ResourceGroups*.

```go
// pkg/util/queue/cluster_queue.go

func SyncEffectiveResourceGroupsToSpec(cq *kueue.ClusterQueue) (needsUpdate bool) {
	if needsUpdate = !equality.Semantic.DeepEqual(cq.*status.EffectiveResourceGroups*, cq.*spec.ResourceGroups*); needsUpdate {
		cq.*status.EffectiveResourceGroups* = cq.*spec.ResourceGroups*
	}
	return
}
```

### Core Controller

The Core Controller is the default controller handling the new parameter.

> The reconciliation logic will check if the ClusterQueue is subject to the default handling scheme and perform the **Default Behavior** if applicable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The reconciliation logic will check if the ClusterQueue is subject to the default handling scheme and perform the [Default Behavior](#default-behavior) if applicable.
```

```go
  // pkg/controller/core/clusterqueue_controller.go

  if isMK, err := admissioncheck.QuotaManagedByMultiKueue(ctx, r.client, &cqObj); err != nil {
		return ctrl.Result{}, err
	} else if isMK {
		log.V(2).Info("Skipping EffectiveResourceGroups sync: MultiKueue Manager ClusterQueue quota is managed by a dedicated MultiKueue controller.")
	} else if queue.SyncEffectiveResourceGroupsToSpec(&cqObj) {
		log.V(2).Info("Syncing *EffectiveResourceGroups* to spec.")
		if err := r.client.Status().Update(ctx, &cqObj); err != nil {
			return ctrl.Result{}, err
		}
	}
```

### MultiKueue quota automation

When feature.MultiKueue and feature.MultiKueueManagerQuotaAutomation are enabled, the MultiKueue Controller will be created. We will delegate the handling of MultiKueue ClusterQueues when it is set up. The Controller itself will:
1. Check if the ClusterQueue has the MultiKueue admission check assigned. If not: it will skip the CQ as it is not considered an MK CQ.
1. Check if:
    1. the ClusterQueue's MultiKueue Config has the **Quota Management Strategy** set to "Automated",
    1. *spec.ResourceGroups* is empty.

> 1. If any of the above conditions are false: it will perform the **Default Behavior**.

Reviewer 3: Yes, but the 2 cases differ in the treatment of quota management Condition.
(In the former case, the status is "not requested"; in the latter, it's "unsupported configuration").

I feel it might be worth mentioning - but up to you.

This section is incredibly important for producing high-quality, user-focused
documentation such as release notes or a development roadmap. It should be
possible to collect this information before implementation begins, in order to
avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

This KEP extends the current resource group definition mechanism of Kueue to accommodate automated quota management.

The proposal is to introduce a new ClusterQueue Status field: EffectiveResourceGroups, used to represent and track the ClusterQueue quota as interpreted by the Kueue scheduler.

> ## Motivation

Reviewer 3: While it reads nice, I'm missing two bits of context here:

1. (Definitely) [KEP-8826](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/pull/8864), as another motivation for having this mechanism in place, and a potential source of another plugin hooking into it.
2. (Preferably) [This section](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/tree/main/keps/9988-multikueue-manager-quota-automation#move-the-aggregated-quota-out-of-clusterqueuespec) of KEP-9988, just for easier "archeology" (what's the context behind this KEP).

2. When MultiKueue Automated Quota Management is **enabled** and **configured correctly**, effective quota will be calculated by the MultiKueue ClusterQueue controller. The value will be set directly to one representing the aggregated quota across the Manager Queue's Workers, calculated as decided upon in [issue 11862](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/issues/11862).

We consider MultiKueue Automated Quota Management **enabled** and **configured correctly** when:
1. feature.MultiKueue is enabled.
2. feature.MultiKueueManagerQuotaAutomation is enabled.
3. The ClusterQueue is MultiKueue, i.e. it has the MultiKueue Admission Check.
4. The Quota Management Strategy is present (non-nil) and set to **"Automated"**.
5. **spec.ResourceGroup is empty.**

We treat spec.ResourceGroup with priority since the parameter is an established, user defined value. If set, it takes precedence over the MultiKueue Manager Queue quota automation. As such, to allow for MultiKueue automated quota management we expect it to be empty.

<!-- ### User Stories (Optional)

#### Story 1 (Optional)

#### Story 2 (Optional)

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional) -->

### Risks and Mitigations

> The major risk here is allowing spec.ResourceGroups to be empty.

Reviewer 3: Nit: AFAIK this is allowed already.

Author: IIUC there are places, like the scheduler AC populating and checking logic, which could be affected by RG being empty when reached by Kueue. To be investigated in the second stage of implementation, as we adjust code and tests for ERG feature gate to be enabled by default.

Reviewer 3: I'm still feeling this exact risk is relatively minor.
_Maybe_ there are some places in the code currently assuming otherwise (i.e. that `Spec.ResourceGroups` is not empty). However:

- they shouldn't be too numerous, as generally the validation rules allow that
- they'll need to be refactored into `GetEffectiveResourceGroups` anyway

TBH I'm more worried about some related-but-still-different risks, that is:

1. The need to refactor `.Spec.ResourceGroups` -> `GetEffectiveResourceGroups` everywhere.
   This feels doable; yet, if we introduce bugs, they'll touch the foundations of Kueue.
   Here, the main mitigation is flipping behind a feature gate.

2. The fact that `.Status.EffectiveResourceGroups` (our _source of truth_) will be _transiently_ empty following CQ creation.
   And it's here where I imagine we'll need to carefully check things don't explode, or misbehave.
   Here I think the main mitigation is to make sure that:
   - `SyncEffectiveResourceGroupsToSpec` happens early enough in the controllers' logic that it can't be derailed by any potential error caused by "effective quotas being empty"
   - the status change triggered by `SyncEffectiveResourceGroupsToSpec` triggers another round of relevant reconcilers (which I hope it will out of the box, but we'll need to verify)

Thoughts?

Author: Re. 1: a proposal (including the use of the resource flag) is available at https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/pull/11807 (WIP)

Re. 2: I am currently working out how to do that safely.

Added a mention on the overall issue in risks and drawbacks.

Mitigating this requires an expansive sweep of existing logic, ensuring the code is proofed against the cases of:

> * referencing an empty spec.ResourceGroups of spec.EffectiveResourceGroups properties,

Reviewer 3: I couldn't parse this. Did you mean "or" instead of "of"?

Author: I'll reword.

* a misalignment/delay of spec.EffectiveResourceGroups being synced to spec.ResourceGroups.

## Design Details

status.EffectiveResourceGroups will be managed by either the Core ClusterQueue Controller or the MultiKueue ClusterQueue Controller (mutually exclusive):
1. status.EffectiveResourceGroups will be managed by the MultiKueue Controller when:
    * features.MultiKueue is enabled AND
    * features.MultiKueueManagerQuotaAutomation is enabled AND
    * ClusterQueue has the MultiKueue admission check assigned.

> 2. Otherwise, status.EffectiveResourceGroups will be managed by the Core Controller.

Reviewer 3: Hmm, doesn't this contradict the content of "Proposal" section?

There, you gave 5 necessary conditions to let the MK CQ Controller manage effective quotas.
Here, you listed only 3 out of those 5.

Author: Fixed.

> The status.EffectiveResourceGroups will be used to provide resource quota only when the UseEffectiveResourceGroupsAsSourceOfTruth feature is enabled. Otherwise we will default to using the spec. To make this feasible, all effective calls to retrieve the ResourceGroups will be handled by a dedicated method:

Reviewer 3: Nit: How about just `EffectiveResourceQuotas` as the FG name?
I don't see how the additional words help. (And I'm feeling they do clutter).
In particular, `Use` feels somewhat out of convention, and irrelevant.

* a misalignment/delay of spec.EffectiveResourceGroups being synced to *spec.ResourceGroups*.

## Design Details

*status.EffectiveResourceGroups* will be managed by either the Core ClusterQueue Controller or the MultiKueue ClusterQueue Controller (mutually exclusive):
1. *status.EffectiveResourceGroups* will be managed by the MultiKueue Controller when (AND):
	* The MultiKueue ClusterQueue Controller is active:
    * features.MultiKueue is enabled
    * features.MultiKueueManagerQuotaAutomation is enabled
    * features.MultiKueueManagerQuotaAutomation is enabled
  * ClusterQueue has the MultiKueue admission check assigned
2. Otherwise, *status.EffectiveResourceGroups* will be managed by the Core Controller.

The *status.EffectiveResourceGroups* will be used to provide resource quota only when the UseEffectiveResourceGroupsAsSourceOfTruth feature is enabled. Otherwise we will default to using the spec. To make this feasible, all effective calls to retrieve the ResourceGroups will be handled by a dedicated method:

```go
func GetEffectiveResourceGroup(cq *kueue.ClusterQueue) []kueue.ResourceGroup {
	if features.Enabled(features.UseEffectiveResourceGroupsAsSourceOfTruth) {

> 		return cq.Status.UseEffectiveResourceGroupsAsSourceOfTruth

Reviewer 3: Search-replace leftover?

```suggestion
		return cq.Status.EffectiveResourceGroups
```

	}

> 	return cq.*spec.ResourceGroups*

Reviewer 3: Nit: if you tried to use emphasized font, it seems not to render.

}
```

> MultiKueue quota automation will require the UseEffectiveResourceGroupsAsSourceOfTruth feature to be enabled alongside its dedicated feature gate.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
MultiKueue quota automation will, since its Alpha2 stage, require the UseEffectiveResourceGroupsAsSourceOfTruth feature to be enabled alongside its dedicated feature gate.
```

Plus optionally link to some section of KEP-9988 (maybe "Graduation Criteria"?) to help the reader understand why.

### Default behavior

By default *status.EffectiveResourceGroups* will be synced to the current value *spec.ResourceGroups*.

```go
// pkg/util/queue/cluster_queue.go

> func SyncEffectiveResourceGroupToSpec(cq *kueue.ClusterQueue) (needsUpdate bool) {

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
func SyncEffectiveResourceGroupsToSpec(cq *kueue.ClusterQueue) (needsUpdate bool) {
```

> func SyncEffectiveResourceGroupToSpec(cq *kueue.ClusterQueue) (needsUpdate bool) {

Reviewer 3: Why taking `needsUpdate` as param? The body computes it anyway.

Author: In 
```go
func (r *cqReconciler) syncEffectiveQuotaToSpec(ctx context.Context, cq *kueue.ClusterQueue, reason, message string) error {
	needsUpdate := queue.SyncEffectiveResourceGroupToSpec(cq)
         // ...
}

```

Reviewer 3: Ahh, `needsUpdate` is output, not input. I see.

	if needsUpdate = !equality.Semantic.DeepEqual(cq.*status.EffectiveResourceGroups*, cq.*spec.ResourceGroups*); needsUpdate {
		cq.*status.EffectiveResourceGroups* = cq.*spec.ResourceGroups*
	}
	return
}
```

### Core Controller

The Core Controller is the default controller handling the new parameter.
The reconciliation logic will check if the ClusterQueue is subject to the default handling scheme and perform the **Default Behavior** if applicable.

> As of right now the only reason for special handling is the MultiKueue Manager ClusterQueue quota automation scheme, but more can be added in the future without modifying the Core Controller.

Reviewer 3: "without modifying the Core Controller" feels like over-statement; I'd expect a new `else if` branch below would be needed, or so?

Author: That line should have ended before this section. I think this part of the sentence was added by accident. Removing.

When the controller detects a reason for special handling of quota sync, it will log it and skip the default behavior.

```go
  // pkg/controller/core/clusterqueue_controller.go

  if isMK, err := admissioncheck.QuotaManagedByMultiKueue(ctx, r.client, &cqObj); err != nil {
		return ctrl.Result{}, err
	} else if isMK {
		log.V(2).Info("Skipping EffectiveResourceGroup sync: MultiKueue Manager ClusterQueue quota is managed by a dedicated MultiKueue controller.")
	} else if queue.SyncEffectiveResourceGroupToSpec(&cqObj) {
		log.V(2).Info("Syncing *EffectiveResourceGroups* to spec.")
		if err := r.client.Status().Update(ctx, &cqObj); err != nil {
			return ctrl.Result{}, err
		}
	}
```

```go
// pkg/util/admissioncheck/admissioncheck.go

func QuotaManagedByMultiKueue(ctx context.Context, c client.Client, cq *kueue.ClusterQueue) (isMK bool, err error) {
	isMK = false
	err = nil
	if features.Enabled(features.MultiKueue) && features.Enabled(features.MultiKueueManagerQuotaAutomation) && features.Enabled(features.EffectiveResourceGroups) {
		_, isMK, err = GetMultiKueueAdmissionCheck(ctx, c, cq)
	}
	return
}
```

> ### MultiKueue quota automation

Reviewer 3: Warning: during the review of my KEP-9988, I got feedback that I went too deep into technical details about the controllers. Even though I stayed far from long code snippets.

For this KEP, my initial gut feeling is that:
- the snippets above this point are fine; they're short and potentially disambiguating
- the short snippet right below this point feels to repeat what was already said; I'd consider removing
- the long snippet does not belong to a KEP; you can bring same value by linking to a draft impl PR

Author: Removed.
